# Genome Assembly and Annotation of E.coli, Chunyang Cao

## Introduction

This project uses 11 E.coli data from NCBI to perform genome assembly and annotation. By integrating assembly, annotation, and pangenome phylogenetics, the genomic landscape and evolutionary relationships are revealed.

## Steps

1. Quality control using fastp and trimming

2. Genome assembly using SPAdes

3. Assembly evaluation using QUAST and BUSCO based on scaffolds.fasta generated by SPAdes

4. Genome annotation using Prokka based on contigs.fasta generated by SPAdes

5. Pangenome analysis using Roary

6. Initial tree construction using FastTree on core_gene_alignment.aln generated by Roary, visualized by iTOL

7. Apply SNP and perform FastTree and iTOL again

## Results

From the results of QUAST and BUSCO, the assembly of 11 E.coli strains yielded high quality genomes. The total assembly lengths ranged from 5.04 Mb to 5.68 Mb, with GC value around 50%. The continuity is robust. N50 values ranging from 95 kb to 136.2 kb. DRR751835 shows the highest continuity with an N50 of 136.2 kb and a largest contig of 436.9 kb. All samples, achieved a completeness score of 100% and less than 1% duplication rates, with no fragmented or missing genes.

Annotation using Prokka identified between 4844 and 5390 CDS per genome. The number of CDS was correlated with the total genome size. In addition, there are 59 to 81 tRNA and a consistent presence of 1 tmRNA. Pangenome analysis via Roary shows a total of 7994 unique genes across the 11 isolates. The core genome, consists of 3702 genes, represents most of the individual genome. The accessory genome includes 2893 shell genes and 1399 cloud genes. This suggests a high degree of flexibility and potential environmental adaptation among these isolates.

Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using both core gene alignments and SNPs. For the core gene alignments tree, the resolution between closely related strains was limited. Hence, a SNP analysis was applied. The SNP tree sucessfully resolved the fine-scale genetic distances, making it possible to differentiate. Both trees show two groups and a divergent lineage DRR751840 by a high mutation load. This indicates it may have undergone a unique evolution.

## Conclusion

This project successfully characterized the genomic profiles of 11 E.coli isolates. All assemblies achieved high quality, with 100% of BUSCO completeness high N50 continuity. Annotation shows a consistent distribution of CDS and essential RNA elements across the strains. Pangenome analysis identifies the cluster groups and identical mutation. These findings show the complex evolutionary history of E.coli.
